Football, or soccer as it is known in North America, is the most popular and widely played sport in the world (Guilianotti and Malcolm 2011:554). Claiming its origins in Great Britain, football has become an integral part of British culture, with almost every town, city and the home nations themselves represented by teams. Spectator violence is a problem that has plagued the game since the beginning of its formal organization by The Football Association in the late 19th Century and has remained a problem to the present day (Maguire 1986).  Modern spectator violence, characterized by an organized hard-core of fans known as hooligans, traces its genesis to the early 1970s and it is this modern form that is the subject of academic study and analysis (Carroll 1980). Infamous to the point of being associated with Britain as the “English Disease”, hooliganism if far from a uniquely British problem but the scale and media coverage that hooliganism receives in Britain makes British society the focus of much sociological study on the subject (Dunning et al 1986). Although a number of differing theories behind the social origins of hooliganism exist, most of them highlight class as the determining factor; this is mostly due to the composition of both the hooligan groups and the club’s support in general. Although some sociologists point to general trends in British society such as nationalism, alcohol consumption, commercialization, as well as violence within the game itself as being the primary causes of football hooliganism, these explanations lack the depth to address the issue at its roots. The social factors that are endemic of the lower working class of British society, specifically the pervasive and glorified role of violence within the lives of young boys and men, the ordered segmentation of housing estates and the prominence of ethnic and gender specific “street corner gangs”  serve as a much better explanation of the roots of organized football violence.
 With the majority of football hooligans coming from working class back rounds, the social conditions of the neighbourhoods, more specifically low-income government housing estates, in which they grew up in are viewed as a contributing factor its occurrence. Ordered Segmentation is a sociological phenomenon that affects the multi-ethnic low income neighbourhoods. Conceived by University of Chicago sociologist Gerald Suttles in his “The Social Order of the Slum”, it is based on his observations of the workings of a low income neighbourhood in the South Side of Chicago. It attempts to model the social and territorial dynamics that govern conflict, amongst other things, within in the “slum”. 
At the core of Suttles’ conception is the formation of small socio-spacial groups (Suttles 1968:31). These groups form from the various neighbourhoods of the slum and come to be identified by both ethnicity and location, such as the Italians from West Forty Ninth, and are generally homogenous with concern to age and gender, consisting almost wholly of teen to early adult aged males (Ibid:32) . A number of factors cause this grouping together, the school system, which sorts grades according to age, is somewhat responsible as is the tendency for young mothers to introduce boys of similar ages and foster friendships which blossom when the boys are left to their own devices, a theme common to many low-income, single parent families (Dunning et al 1986:231). The development of these groups is also encouraged by the prevalence of ethnically segregated neighbourhoods, such as Chinatowns and Little Italy’s, which serve to encourage ethnic solidarity (Suttles 1968:3).  These groups or “street corner gangs” as Dunning and Co. refer to them as, are central to Suttles’ observations of conflict within the slum.
Conflict within the slum occurs, according to Suttles, on a number of different levels. Suttles’ identifies three separate levels of opposition existing in the slum, the first being simply confrontation between ethnic street corner gangs of similar ages from different areas, ethnicity in this case is a source of conflict rather than an agent of solidarity as the boys identify with their area first and will easily come into conflict with members of the same ethnicity from other neighbourhoods (Ibid:32). These confrontations are spontaneous, violent only to a small extent, and essentially amount to posturing between rival groups, escalation outside of the two gangs involves opposition at Suttles’ second level (Ibid:32).  The second level involves all males of a singular ethnicity from the same area versus all the males of a singular ethnicity from a different area, this usually stems from a first level conflict that has grown through rumours over a couple days and is not a spur-of-the-moment, rather it is a mobilization of all of ethnic males versus their rivals of from another section (Ibid:33).
 Suttles’ first two levels of opposition encompass conflicts amongst an ethnicity, his third level, however, is much wider in scope. Within his model the third level of opposition refers to conflict between different areas of the slum, as Suttles (1968) describes it, “Here both age and ethnic differences are muted by the single fact of territorial unity” (33). Usually these are second level conflicts that have escalated beyond a single ethnicity and can be viewed as all of the residents of a particular area allying against a perceived outside threat. Although they rarely reach the level of pitched combat, authorities tend to intervene before they can, they do demonstrate the volatile of relations amongst different areas of the slum (Ibid:33). An interesting note, however, is the fragility of the apparent territorial solidarity displayed by the residents as Suttles (1968) notes, “There are grave misgivings about the unity of all ethnic groups in an area …. Aggressors suspect territorial unity….the defenders feel insecure about this unity” (33). In all, Suttles’ model of Ordered Segmentation helps to explain how and why groups from different areas come into conflict with each other.
Violence, as an integral part of football hooliganism, is explained in conjunction with Suttles’ ordered segmentation. The role that violence plays in the lives of young boys and men tends to be amplified in areas of cities that tend to behave along the lines of ordered segmentation. This itself is due to a number of social factors, both tacit and explicit, that affect the lives of men from an early age (Dunning et al 1986). The regularity at which boys are left unsupervised and amongst their age-group peers for long periods of time, due in part to their parents professional obligations, lends itself to the development of group hierarchies based on physical strength and prowess (Ibid). The segregation of the sexes also plays a role as boys are exposed less to the “softening influence” of women and generally assume a dominant social role based upon their physical dominance. Additionally women tend to value aggressive “macho” characteristics in men and well as tending to be relatively aggressive themselves, both contributing the violent, aggressive environment in which children are raised (Ibid). This is compounded by the tendency of parents on the lower rungs of the socio-economic scale to be predisposed to “exert less pressure on their growing children to exercise strict and continuous self-control over aggressive behaviour”, and when they do attempt to modify their children’s behaviour they are more likely to resort to violence as a tool of persuasion (Ibid). Furthermore the frequency of feuds between rival families, gangs, buildings and towns provides ample opportunity for young men to express themselves in a violent manner. Finally a strong identification with family and place of residence or origin amplifies the willingness of men to commit violent acts in order to defend either their own safety of the good name of what they claim to represent (Ibid).  These social factors combine to enhance the role of violence in the young lives of men.
In addition to their home lives, the professional lives of lower-class men have an effect on the occurrence of football hooliganism. The cumulative impact of Taylorism and Fordism on the industrial base of Great Britain served as a point of alienation amongst labour oriented working-class jobs (Beamish 2012). The inability of men of the lower-class to obtain gratification and status through their work, which had become repetitive, non-stimulating and restrictive, helped to lead men to football hooliganism where they could gain both gratification and renown through various exploits (Dunning et al 1986). These exploits would exemplify, as Carroll (1980) described, working class “values of masculinity, victory, toughness and active participation” that the men could not achieve through the channels, namely work and education, that were available to those higher up the social ladder.
Suttles’ model, with the added context of violence, is taken by sociologist Eric Dunning and the so-called “Leicester School of football hooliganism” and applied to what they term as “rough” working class English neighbourhoods. Their focus shifts from the areas of Suttles’ study to the housing estates that form the basis of low-income government housing in Great Britain. The focus is on these specific buildings because, as Dunning et al (1986) observes, “Over half of the large contingent of Oxford fans arrested.... came from the estate in question” (230). Conflict amongst the various groups of the housing estates occurs regularly, the first two levels of opposition within Suttles’ model, but organized football hooliganism, as a response to an outside threat, which in this case is aggressive travelling fans, acts as a unifying force and catalyzes rival groups to act together. This is described by Dunning et al (1986) as the formation of ad-hoc alliances based on the simple premise that the enemy of my enemy is my friend, and explains why street corner gangs, who will and have violently confronted each other will band together as their collective identity is threatened by an outside force demonstrating, as Suttles’ aptly put, “differences are muted by the single fact of territorial unity “. Additionally this explains why hooligan groups, namely that larger groups visiting other cities, have described encountering large combined hooligan groups whose membership is comprised of supporters from a number of local clubs who, given the right circumstances, would be fighting amongst themselves rather than with a perceived outside force (Ibid). Taken a level up this can also be used to describe inter-nation violence that occurred to a large extent at England games both home and abroad, which occurred with regularity during the 1980s and 1990s, with the entire lower-class based fan base reacting to a large outside threat with violence. The application of ordered segmentation to lower-class English society provides a convincing account of the sources of football hooliganism.
Although Dunning, Murphy and Williams provide a convincing explanation of the sources of football hooliganism, a number of other schools of thought provide a limited explanation. Ian Taylor (1980) employs a Marxist point of view, in which he views the clubs as participatory democracies of the lower-class, and the violence that accompanies football hooliganism is a proletariat response to the “bourgeoisification” of the clubs as commercialization became prevalent in the game. This view however is somewhat lacking because the violence is between different groups within the working class rather than violence directed specifically at any authoritarian group.  Additionally Dunning et al (1990) identify some explanations they deem as being the “official explanations”, most significantly alcohol consumption and violence within the game. These are dismissed as at most being amplifying factors and not root causes themselves, because alcohols’ inhibition factor it simply makes people more likely to act in an aggressive way and violence within the game is just a trigger rather than an actual deep cause (Dunning et al 1999).  A final cause they recognize is nationalism, which while it does offer some explanation to events occurring at an international level of play it doesn’t help to explain the conflict amongst citizens of the same nation (Ibid). Some other explanations for football hooliganism do exist, but they lack the depth neccesary to address the causes that the view promoted by Eric Dunning and the Leicester School approach.
Football hooliganism is best explained by the cumulative effects of the social norms of the working class, namely the ordered segmentation of lower-class neighbourhoods, the enhanced role of violence and the formation of gender specific gangs. These address the causes of football hooliganism at their roots while views promoted by other sociologists simply address amplifying or correlating factors, such as nationalism, alcohol consumption and violence within the game, or do not completely account for  the dynamics of conflict amongst spectators, Taylors’ commercialization theory for example. Spectator violence at football matches is a world-wide problem that reflects a common social reality.  
